README.md, before:

# Introduction

This document shall summarize thoughts and instructions on how data cubes can be generated in the context of the DeepCube project. 
This is supposed to be a living document and shall be updated whenever new achievements have been made. 

## Status quo of the Earth System Data Cube

One of the project partners (MPG) was active in the consortium and co-created the so-called Earth System Data Cube. The idea behind this dataset was to bring together as many global Earth observation products as possible and make them ready for seamless multivariate analysis. 
Because of the research interest of the involved science partners, the focus of this data cube was to particularly enable efficient multivariate time series analysis on global datasets. In order to achieve this, we decided to regrid all involved 
variables to a common spatiotemporal grid. Although this involved some data duplication and increase of storage, we concluded
that instant access to a variety of datasets preferable. 
The initial plan for the DeepCube project (according to the proposal) was to use the cube generation software used to generate the ESDC to create custom data cubes for the single use cases 

## Communicated Requirements by the users

As a result of the DeepCube kickoff meeting as well as individual discussions it became apparent that the current data cube model, that does a regridding to a common spatiotemporal resolution is not feasible for most of the use cases. 
The main problem is that many data either come on high spatial and low temporal resolution (e.g. Sentinel, MODIS) or on high temporal and low spatial resolution (e.g. ERA5). In order to bring datasets of these different scale together with the ESDC approach, on would have to interpolate heavily, which would drastically increase the data volume. 
Therefore many of the use cases dealing with large data volumes were interested in so-called multi-resolution data cubes, 
where datasets are stored on their original resolution and re-gridded on the fly 

# Cube Generation - Howto

## Why rewrite the data at all?

As many use cases aim to generate multi-resolution data cubes, one might ask the question why an additional data cube generation step would be necessary at all. For example the OpenDataCube initiative has taken an approach where the original
data remains more or less untouched and a database of the existing files and layers is built which helps for efficient access to the data. The most important consideration here is chunking. Usually the original data is stored in a format where spatially close points are close on disk, i.e. the data is stored in the pysical unit of images. Depending on the use case, however, it might be necessary to do operations where one needs to acces a full multi-year time series for a certain spatial coordinate, or access many of the time series seqeuntially. 
In this case, re-chunking the data so that chunks span over a longer temporal extent is essential. The second reason to re-write the data instead of only creating views into the original data is chunk alignment. In order to have most efficient access to a multivariate dataset, it is important that chunk boundaries of the individual variables align. Ideally, for training applications, a chunk would have exactly the size and shape of a single training batch, so that no excess data has to be read or transfered. 
If all one wants to do is e.g. image classication on a univariate dataset, then rewriting the data is not necessary and the original data can be accessed directly (and maybe indexed before, if loading the dataset takes too long, maybe through approaches like https://xpublish.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ or by building an OpenDataCube)
However, if one wants to operate on time series, e.g. traing an LSTM for that operates on full time series at a by-pixel level, one would have to rewrite the data once to a new data cube and a chunk size that has maximum extent in time. 
If one wants to train a model on short sequences of images (i.e. video prediction, ), one would use chunks that reflect exactly the size of an image sequence. 

## General considerations

- need to bring all data into a single spatial reference system
- unify metadata by loading into a common framework (xarray)
- save the data and hope for Dask to solve chunking problems

## Generating single-resolution data cubes


## Cube generation in Julia using ESDL.jl

- felixcremer, could you add a link to your example here?

## Minicube generation in Python using xarray/rioxarray functionality only

- only for building mini-datacubes
- when cubes get too large, the dask scheduler might give up when re-chunking

## Data Cube generation using xcube-gen

- only for building single-resolution data cubes
- 

### Prerequisites

- every dataset is in NetCDF format, can consist of multiple files, but should be in a single folder
- datasets should already be in equirectangular lon-lat coordinate system
- s

Commit message:

Add example notebook for cube generation in Julia
This adds the Project.toml and the pluto notebook to explain how we can
load data in the ESDL and save it as zarr or netcdf format.
This currently depends on
https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDAL.jl/pull/167 for the use of
unsafe_buildvrt.

README.md, after:

# Introduction

This document shall summarize thoughts and instructions on how data cubes can be generated in the context of the DeepCube project. 
This is supposed to be a living document and shall be updated whenever new achievements have been made. 

## Status quo of the Earth System Data Cube

One of the project partners (MPG) was active in the consortium and co-created the so-called Earth System Data Cube. The idea behind this dataset was to bring together as many global Earth observation products as possible and make them ready for seamless multivariate analysis. 
Because of the research interest of the involved science partners, the focus of this data cube was to particularly enable efficient multivariate time series analysis on global datasets. In order to achieve this, we decided to regrid all involved 
variables to a common spatiotemporal grid. Although this involved some data duplication and increase of storage, we concluded
that instant access to a variety of datasets preferable. 
The initial plan for the DeepCube project (according to the proposal) was to use the cube generation software used to generate the ESDC to create custom data cubes for the single use cases 

## Communicated Requirements by the users

As a result of the DeepCube kickoff meeting as well as individual discussions it became apparent that the current data cube model, that does a regridding to a common spatiotemporal resolution is not feasible for most of the use cases. 
The main problem is that many data either come on high spatial and low temporal resolution (e.g. Sentinel, MODIS) or on high temporal and low spatial resolution (e.g. ERA5). In order to bring datasets of these different scale together with the ESDC approach, on would have to interpolate heavily, which would drastically increase the data volume. 
Therefore many of the use cases dealing with large data volumes were interested in so-called multi-resolution data cubes, 
where datasets are stored on their original resolution and re-gridded on the fly 

# Cube Generation - Howto

## Why rewrite the data at all?

As many use cases aim to generate multi-resolution data cubes, one might ask the question why an additional data cube generation step would be necessary at all. For example the OpenDataCube initiative has taken an approach where the original
data remains more or less untouched and a database of the existing files and layers is built which helps for efficient access to the data. The most important consideration here is chunking. Usually the original data is stored in a format where spatially close points are close on disk, i.e. the data is stored in the pysical unit of images. Depending on the use case, however, it might be necessary to do operations where one needs to acces a full multi-year time series for a certain spatial coordinate, or access many of the time series seqeuntially. 
In this case, re-chunking the data so that chunks span over a longer temporal extent is essential. The second reason to re-write the data instead of only creating views into the original data is chunk alignment. In order to have most efficient access to a multivariate dataset, it is important that chunk boundaries of the individual variables align. Ideally, for training applications, a chunk would have exactly the size and shape of a single training batch, so that no excess data has to be read or transfered. 
If all one wants to do is e.g. image classication on a univariate dataset, then rewriting the data is not necessary and the original data can be accessed directly (and maybe indexed before, if loading the dataset takes too long, maybe through approaches like https://xpublish.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ or by building an OpenDataCube)
However, if one wants to operate on time series, e.g. traing an LSTM for that operates on full time series at a by-pixel level, one would have to rewrite the data once to a new data cube and a chunk size that has maximum extent in time. 
If one wants to train a model on short sequences of images (i.e. video prediction, ), one would use chunks that reflect exactly the size of an image sequence. 

## General considerations

- need to bring all data into a single spatial reference system
- unify metadata by loading into a common framework (xarray)
- save the data and hope for Dask to solve chunking problems

## Generating single-resolution data cubes


## Cube generation in Julia using ESDL.jl

- If you want to use Julia for the data cube generation you can follow the [tutorial notebook](loads1tifs.jl)

To start this tutorial you have to start Julia 1.6 in this folder and then you have to start Pluto with the current folder as environment by 
```julia
Pluto.run(;project="@.")
```

Then you can select the notebook inside of Pluto.

## Minicube generation in Python using xarray/rioxarray functionality only

- only for building mini-datacubes
- when cubes get too large, the dask scheduler might give up when re-chunking

## Data Cube generation using xcube-gen

- only for building single-resolution data cubes
- 

### Prerequisites

- every dataset is in NetCDF format, can consist of multiple files, but should be in a single folder
- datasets should already be in equirectangular lon-lat coordinate system
- s
